## Anno Database
Unfortunately I didn't find anything notable on Stella Musulin in here. A search for "Stella Musulin" returns no results, and all of the items I looked at which came up in a search for "Musulin" were about her father-in-law. Anno's collection of *Die Presse* issues dates only from 1848 to 1896, and they only have one issue of *Die Furche*, from 1946. Maybe there is something relevant to the project in here but I couldn't find it. 

## Wienbibliothek
- Schürrer, Hermann. 1974. *Europe: The Dead have nothing to laugh about.* (Excerpt). Translated by Stella Musulin. Unpublished(?), held in Wienbibliothek.

In the estate of the Viennese poet, writer, and playwright Hermann Schürrer, held by the Wienbibliothek, I found a translation done by Stella Musulin, from German into English, of five pages of a book of Schürrer's called *Europa: Die Tote haben nichts zu lachen.* It looks like the translation was never published, but the last line reads: "© 1974 International P.E.N. Books.” I have tried to sort out the background on all of this, with mixed results. 

Schürrer's book is very strange - part autobiography, part intellectual history, part 
polemic against what he saw as a grossly unjust postwar European society. 
His style is dense and erudite but also personal and funny. It's intense, and I think Musulin's translation captures it as well as any translation could. But the whole thing raises a lot of questions. Schürrer seems to have been very much an outsider figure, an [excessive drinker](https://www.geschichtewiki.wien.gv.at/Hermann_Sch%C3%BCrrer) who spent [two years](https://de-academic.com/dic.nsf/dewiki/608491) in prison and [co-founded](https://www.onb.ac.at/oe-literaturzeitschriften/Freibord/Freibord.htm) the avant-garde literary magazine "Freibord." (Today, *der Standard* [says](https://www.derstandard.at/story/1997041/veranstaltungstipp--lesetheater), he is "as good as forgotten.") Another piece from around this period is called "Einführung in den Anarchismus," which he once performed at a reading alongside the German version of the passage Musulin translated. In short, Schürrer is not the kind of company one might have expected a baroness to keep! 
 
The passage Musulin translated runs from page 23 to 27 of the of [the original](https://permalink.obvsg.at/wbr/AC04751056) 1971 German edition. It quotes from Bertolt Brecht  ("it is more criminal to found a bank than to rob it"), Lord Acton ("absolute power corrupts absolutely"), and Soren Kierkegaard ("the state is the most antisocial being"). Schürrer is angry at, or at least disappointed in, every facet of society, from corrupt judges, priests, and doctors to the arms manufacturers and "giants of industry" whom they protect. He attacks "the peasant with his rapacity and stupid piety" as well as "the worker with his reduced intellectual needs." It ends with a surreal poetic sequence that has him draining the oceans to water the Sahara desert. It really is a remarkable piece of writing, but it's tough to figure out how Musulin ended up translating it. 

Musulin might have met Schürrer through *Wort und Wahrheit*. According to [an essay](https://www.onb.ac.at/oe-literaturzeitschriften/Wort_und_Wahrheit/Wort_und_Wahrheit_essay.pdf) from the Austrian National Library, Schürrer contributed four pieces to the magazine for a 1971 issue, when Musulin was probably an editor. 

The role played by "International P.E.N. Books" - presumably a publishing arm of [the group](https://pen-international.org/) promoting freedom of expression in literature - is harder to explain. The German edition of *Europa* was published by Hanser Verlag, and an English version, as far as I can tell, never appeared. Was P.E.N. planning, for some reason, to publish an English translation of this bizarre autobigraphy from a minor Austrian writer?

Trying to figure this out, I found that the Harry Ransom Center at the U of Texas has a massive [archive](https://norman.hrc.utexas.edu/fasearch/findingAid.cfm?eadid=01209) of the records of P.E.N. from 1912 - 2008 (over 300 boxes!). The [index](https://norman.hrc.utexas.edu/fasearch/pdf/01209.pdf) to the collection records items for both Musulin and Auden (Musulin is listed as affiliated with the "P.E.N. Austrian Centre”). These records do not appear to have been digitized. The Ransom Center does have a digital collection with 3,500 images and other records (including letters) from P.E.N. members, but nothing turns up in a search for “Musulin.” (“Auden” appears [11 times](https://hrc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p15878coll97/search/searchterm/auden) in something called the P.E.N. News, but I haven’t looked through these yet). According to the schema listed on archive page website, the box with the items pertaining to Musulin is categorized under "PEN Committees, 1931-2008,” so they might just be minutes or notes from meetings she participated in (but who knows!). Auden’s box looks like it contains “Correspondance” - potentially much more interesting. I’m not sure if this warrants a field trip, but Austin, TX *is* pretty nice this time of year…

All of this might have been a waste of time, but I found it pretty interesting. How Musulin came into contact with Schürrer, why he asked her to translate a few pages of his book, why she agreed, and how exactly P.E.N. is involved is a mystery to me, but it suggests Musulin was interested in, or at least open to, all kinds of stylistic and political ideas. 

In any case, I made [a .pdf scan](archive_research/musulin-schuerrer_translation.pdf) of Musulin's translation, and I [scanned](archive_research/SchuerrerExcerpt.pdf) the corresponding passage in the published German edition. Just "for fun" I also made a [Markdown](archive_research/musulin-schuerrer_translation.md) transcription of Musulin's translation and converted it to [XML](archive_research/musulin-schuerrer_translation.xml). 

## Austrian National Library

I found a listing for a few [letters](https://search.onb.ac.at/primo-explore/fulldisplay?docid=ONB_alma21310021180003338&context=L&vid=ONB&lang=de_DE&search_scope=ONB_gesamtbestand&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engine&tab=default_tab&query=any,contains,%22stella%20musulin%22&mode=basic) sent to Musulin by the composer Egon Wellesz, but they aren't digitized and I haven't been down there to check it out yet - maybe next week. 